---
title: "2.4 Electronic Mail"
date: 2024-01-09T19:25:02+02:00
draft: false
series : [Computer Networks]
---

- **Three Major Components of Email:**
  1. **User Agents:**
     - *Alternative Name:* "Mail reader."
     - *Function:* Composing, editing, and reading mail messages.
     - *Examples:* Outlook, Thunderbird, iPhone mail client.
     - *Storage:* Outgoing and incoming messages are stored on the server.
 2. **Mail Servers:**
  - *Mailbox:*
    - Contains incoming messages for the user.
  
  - *Message Queue:*
    - Stores outgoing (to be sent) mail messages.
  
  - *SMTP Protocol:*
    - Used between mail servers to send email messages.
  
  - *Client:*
    - Sending mail server.
  
  - *Server:*
    - Receiving mail server.
3. **SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol):**
  - *Transport Protocol:*
    - Uses TCP to reliably transfer email messages from client to server, typically on port 25.

  - *Direct Transfer:*
    - Sending server to receiving server.

  - *Three Phases of Transfer:*
    1. **Handshaking (Greeting):**
    2. **Transfer of Messages:**
    3. **Closure:**

  - *Command/Response Interaction:*
    - Similar to HTTP and FTP.
  
  - *Commands:*
    - ASCII text.
  
  - *Response:*
    - Includes a status code and phrase.
  
  - *Message Format:*
    - Messages must be in 7-bit ASCII.

**SMTP uses persistent connections**

- **SMTP:**
  - *Delivery/Storage:*
    - Responsible for the delivery and storage of email messages to the receiver’s server.
  
- **Mail Access Protocols:**
  1. **POP (Post Office Protocol) [RFC 1939]:**
     - *Functionality:* Authorization and download of emails.
  
  2. **IMAP (Internet Mail Access Protocol) [RFC 1730]:**
     - *Functionality:* Offers more features, including manipulation of stored messages on the server.
  
  3. **HTTP:**
     - *Usage:* Used by web-based email services such as Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo! Mail, etc.

